README.md, before:

# MEDS "Everything-is-code" Autoregressive Model

[![PyPI - Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/MEDS-EIC-AR)](https://pypi.org/project/MEDS-EIC-AR/)
![python](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Python_3.12-blue?logo=python&logoColor=white)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/graph/badge.svg?token=5RORKQOZF9)](https://codecov.io/gh/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR)
[![tests](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/actions/workflows/tests.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/actions/workflows/tests.yaml)
[![code-quality](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/actions/workflows/code-quality-main.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/actions/workflows/code-quality-main.yaml)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg?labelColor=gray)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR#license)
[![PRs](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/pulls)
[![contributors](https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR.svg)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/graphs/contributors)

A MEDS, "Everything-is-code" style Autoregressive Generative Model, capable of zero-shot inference.

This is based on the [MEDS-Torch](https://github.com/Oufattole/meds-torch) model of the same name.

## Installation

```bash
pip install MEDS-EIC-AR
```

### Optional Dependencies

#### WandB

If you want to use WandB for logging, you can install it via:

```bash
pip install MEDS-EIC-AR[wandb]
```

#### MLFlow

If you want to use MLFlow for logging, you can install it via:

```bash
pip install MEDS-EIC-AR[mlflow]
```

This will also install `psutil` and `pynvml` as dependencies, to enable MLFlow tracking of system CPU and GPU
resources, which is enabled by default or can be controlled via the `MLFLOW_ENABLE_SYSTEM_METRICS_LOGGING`
environment variable. See the
[MLFlow documentation](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/system-metrics/#turn-onoff-system-metrics-logging) for
more details.

#### Flash Attention

For using flash attention, you need to subsequently install flash attention as well. This can often be done
via:

```bash
pip install flash-attn --no-build-isolation
```

If you encounter errors, see the [flash-attn](https://github.com/Dao-AILab/flash-attention) package
documentation.

## Usage

### 1. Pre-process your data

You have three directories:

1. `$RAW_MEDS_DIR` -- The raw MEDS data directory that you want to pre-process.
2. `$INTERMEDIATE_DIR` -- An intermediate directory where the partially processed data will be stored prior
    to tokenization and tensorization.
3. `$FINAL_DATA_DIR` -- The final output directory where the tokenized and tensorized data will be stored.
    This directory is suitable for use in loading the data with `meds-torch-data`.

Run:

```bash
MEICAR_process_data input_dir="$RAW_MEDS_DIR" \
    intermediate_dir="$INTERMEDIATE_DIR" \
    output_dir="$FINAL_DATA_DIR"
```

> [!NOTE]
> If your data is not sharded by split at the outset, you will need to add the `do_reshard=True` command line
> parameter to the `MEICAR_process_data` command, which ensures the system reshards the data to be sub-sharded
> by split before beginning pre-processing.

You can also run this in demo mode, which lowers the filtering thresholds significantly so the script does not
filter out all data:

```bash
MEICAR_process_data ... do_demo=True
```

You can exert more fine-grained control on the filtering with the following environment variables:

1. `MIN_SUBJECTS_PER_CODE`: How many subjects must a given code be observed within to be included in the
    final vocabulary? Note that this excludes some sentinel codes which are always retained.
2. `MIN_EVENTS_PER_SUBJECT`: How many events must a subject have to be included in the final dataset?

### 2. Pre-train the model

You can pre-train the model using the `MEICAR_pretrain` command. To use this, let us assume you have a new
directory to store the pretrained model artifacts called `$PRETRAINED_MODEL_DIR`. Then, you can run:

```bash
MEICAR_pretrain datamodule.config.tensorized_cohort_dir="$FINAL_DATA_DIR" \
    output_dir="$PRETRAINED_MODEL_DIR" \
    datamodule.batch_size=32
```

to train the model for 10 epochs.

This uses a [Hydra](https://hydra.cc/) configuration system, with the root config located in the
[`_pretrain.yaml`](src/MEDS_EIC_AR/configs/_pretrain.yaml) file. You can override any of the nested
configuration parameters (as shown above via `datamodule.config.tensorized_cohort_dir` on the command line,
though you will more likely materialize an experimental configuration file to disk in yaml form and overwrite
the config path and name directly in the normal hydra manner.

> [!WARNING]
> Tests here only validate that the model runs without errors and (in demo mode) runs without producing nans
> or invalid values. It has not yet been assessed to ensure it runs to convergence, etc.

### 3. Zero-shot Inference

Zero-shot inference consists of two steps:

1. Given a task cohort and a pre-trained model, for each sample in the task cohort, generate future
    trajectories from those inputs forward with the pre-trained model and save them to disk in a pseudo-MEDS
    format.
2. Resolve these generated trajectories into concrete, probabilistic predictions for the task cohort.

#### 3.1 Generate Trajectories for a task spec.

You can directly generate trajectories using the `MEICAR_generate_trajectories` command. This requires a few
more configuration parameters than the pre-training step, so let's go through those:

1. You need to specify the task labels directory in the `datamodule.config.task_labels_dir` parameter.
2. You need to specify the model initialization directory in the `model_initialization_dir` parameter. This
    is the output directory of the pre-train step.
3. You need to specify how you want to trade-off between allowed input context size and the maximum possible
    generated trajectory length. The former allows you to use more of the patient's record, but the latter
    controls how far into the future you can predict. This can be configured with one of three parameters in
    the `seq_lens` part of the config. If you set:
    - `seq_lens.generation_context_size`, that will be the maximum length of the input context, and the
        remaining length of the pretrained model's maximum sequence length will be used for generation.
    - `seq_lens.max_generated_trajectory_len`, that will be the maximum length of the generated trajectory,
        and the remaining length of the pretrained model's maximum sequence length will be used for the
        input.
    - `seq_lens.frac_seq_len_as_context`, that will be the fraction of the pretrained model's maximum
        sequence length that will be used for the input context, and the remaining length will be used for
        generation. This is set by default to 0.25, which means that 25% of the maximum sequence length will
        be used for the input context, and 75% will be used for generation. If you wish to use another mode
        on the command line, be sure to set this to `null` to disable it.
4. Lastly, you need to specify how many trajectories per task sample you wish to generate, and for which
    splits you wish to generate samples. You can do this via the `inference.generate_for_splits` and
    `inference.N_trajectories_per_task_sample` parameters. The former is a list of splits to generate and the
    latter is the number of trajectories to generate per task sample. The default is to generate 20
    trajectories for each task sample in the tuning and held out splits.

After these are set, you can run the following command to generate trajectories for a task cohort:

```bash
MEICAR_generate_trajectories \
    output_dir="$GENERATED_TRAJECTORIES_DIR" \
    model_initialization_dir="$PRETRAINED_MODEL_DIR" \
    datamodule.config.tensorized_cohort_dir="$FINAL_DATA_DIR" \
    datamodule.config.task_labels_dir="$TASK_ROOT_DIR/$TASK_NAME" \
    datamodule.batch_size=32
```

This will generate trajectories for the task cohort and save them in the format:
`$GENERATED_TRAJECTORIES_DIR/$SPLIT/$SAMPLE.parquet`.

See the documentation for [`format_trajectories`](src/MEDS_EIC_AR/generation/format_trajectories.py) for more
details on the format of the generated trajectories.

> [!WARNING]
> The tests here only validate that this runs without errors and produces trajectory files that are valid,
> non-identical across different samples, and containing the right subjects. It has not yet been assessed to
> ensure full correctness.

#### 3.2 Resolve Trajectories into Predictions.

Not yet implemented.

## Documentation

### Configuration and Controlling Model Structure

This model is configured via Hydra and PyTorch lightning. The configuration structure of this repository is as
follows:

```python
>>> print_directory("./src/MEDS_EIC_AR/configs", config=PrintConfig(file_extension=".yaml"))
├── _demo_generate_trajectories.yaml
├── _demo_pretrain.yaml
├── _generate_trajectories.yaml
├── _pretrain.yaml
├── datamodule
│   ├── default.yaml
│   ├── generate_trajectories.yaml
│   └── pretrain.yaml
├── inference
│   ├── default.yaml
│   └── demo.yaml
├── lightning_module
│   ├── LR_scheduler
│   │   ├── cosine_annealing_warm_restarts.yaml
│   │   ├── get_cosine_schedule_with_warmup.yaml
│   │   ├── one_cycle_LR.yaml
│   │   └── reduce_LR_on_plateau.yaml
│   ├── default.yaml
│   ├── demo.yaml
│   ├── large.yaml
│   ├── medium.yaml
│   ├── metrics
│   │   └── default.yaml
│   ├── micro.yaml
│   ├── model
│   │   ├── default.yaml
│   │   ├── demo.yaml
│   │   ├── large.yaml
│   │   ├── medium.yaml
│   │   ├── micro.yaml
│   │   └── small.yaml
│   ├── optimizer
│   │   ├── adam.yaml
│   │   └── adamw.yaml
│   └── small.yaml
└── trainer
    ├── callbacks
    │   ├── default.yaml
    │   ├── early_stopping.yaml
    │   ├── learning_rate_monitor.yaml
    │   └── model_checkpoint.yaml
    ├── default.yaml
    ├── demo.yaml
    └── logger
        ├── csv.yaml
        ├── mlflow.yaml
        └── wandb.yaml

```

## Output Files

The output files of the pre-training step are stored in the directory specified by the `output_dir` parameter
and take the following structure:

```python
>>> print_directory(pretrained_model)
├── .logs
│   ├── .hydra
│   │   ├── config.yaml
│   │   ├── hydra.yaml
│   │   └── overrides.yaml
│   └── __main__.log
├── best_model.ckpt
├── checkpoints
│   ├── epoch=0-step=1.ckpt
│   ├── epoch=0-step=2.ckpt
│   ├── epoch=1-step=3.ckpt
│   ├── epoch=1-step=4.ckpt
│   └── last.ckpt
├── config.yaml
├── loggers
│   └── csv
│       └── version_0
│           ├── hparams.yaml
│           └── metrics.csv
└── resolved_config.yaml

```

Commit message:

Remove unused drop_numeric stage and update tests

README.md, after:

# MEDS "Everything-is-code" Autoregressive Model

[![PyPI - Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/MEDS-EIC-AR)](https://pypi.org/project/MEDS-EIC-AR/)
![python](https://img.shields.io/badge/-Python_3.12-blue?logo=python&logoColor=white)
[![codecov](https://codecov.io/gh/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/graph/badge.svg?token=5RORKQOZF9)](https://codecov.io/gh/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR)
[![tests](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/actions/workflows/tests.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/actions/workflows/tests.yaml)
[![code-quality](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/actions/workflows/code-quality-main.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/actions/workflows/code-quality-main.yaml)
[![license](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-green.svg?labelColor=gray)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR#license)
[![PRs](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/pulls)
[![contributors](https://img.shields.io/github/contributors/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR.svg)](https://github.com/mmcdermott/MEDS_EIC_AR/graphs/contributors)

A MEDS, "Everything-is-code" style Autoregressive Generative Model, capable of zero-shot inference.

This is based on the [MEDS-Torch](https://github.com/Oufattole/meds-torch) model of the same name.

## Installation

```bash
pip install MEDS-EIC-AR
```

### Optional Dependencies

#### WandB

If you want to use WandB for logging, you can install it via:

```bash
pip install MEDS-EIC-AR[wandb]
```

#### MLFlow

If you want to use MLFlow for logging, you can install it via:

```bash
pip install MEDS-EIC-AR[mlflow]
```

This will also install `psutil` and `pynvml` as dependencies, to enable MLFlow tracking of system CPU and GPU
resources, which is enabled by default or can be controlled via the `MLFLOW_ENABLE_SYSTEM_METRICS_LOGGING`
environment variable. See the
[MLFlow documentation](https://mlflow.org/docs/latest/system-metrics/#turn-onoff-system-metrics-logging) for
more details.

#### Flash Attention

For using flash attention, you need to subsequently install flash attention as well. This can often be done
via:

```bash
pip install flash-attn --no-build-isolation
```

If you encounter errors, see the [flash-attn](https://github.com/Dao-AILab/flash-attention) package
documentation.

## Usage

### 1. Pre-process your data

You have three directories:

1. `$RAW_MEDS_DIR` -- The raw MEDS data directory that you want to pre-process.
2. `$INTERMEDIATE_DIR` -- An intermediate directory where the partially processed data will be stored prior
    to tokenization and tensorization.
3. `$FINAL_DATA_DIR` -- The final output directory where the tokenized and tensorized data will be stored.
    This directory is suitable for use in loading the data with `meds-torch-data`.

Run:

```bash
MEICAR_process_data input_dir="$RAW_MEDS_DIR" \
    intermediate_dir="$INTERMEDIATE_DIR" \
    output_dir="$FINAL_DATA_DIR"
```

> [!NOTE]
> If your data is not sharded by split at the outset, you will need to add the `do_reshard=True` command line
> parameter to the `MEICAR_process_data` command, which ensures the system reshards the data to be sub-sharded
> by split before beginning pre-processing.

You can also run this in demo mode, which lowers the filtering thresholds significantly so the script does not
filter out all data:

```bash
MEICAR_process_data ... do_demo=True
```

You can exert more fine-grained control on the filtering with the following environment variables:

1. `MIN_SUBJECTS_PER_CODE`: How many subjects must a given code be observed within to be included in the
    final vocabulary? Note that this excludes some sentinel codes which are always retained.
2. `MIN_EVENTS_PER_SUBJECT`: How many events must a subject have to be included in the final dataset?
3. `N_VALUE_QUANTILES`: Integer specifying the number of evenly spaced quantiles to compute for numeric
   value binning.
4. `NUMERIC_QUANTILES`: Explicit list of quantiles (e.g. `[0.25, 0.5, 0.75]`). Takes precedence over
   `N_VALUE_QUANTILES`.
5. `NUMERIC_QUANTILES_FP`: Path to a YAML or JSON file containing custom bin definitions. When supplied,
   the quantile fitting stage is skipped and these bins are used directly for numeric value discretization.
6. `INCLUDE_NUMERIC_VALUES`: Set to `0` to drop numeric values entirely (only time interval bins are kept).
7. `USE_DATA_DRIVEN_TEMPORAL_BINS`: Set to `1` to learn time interval bins from the data instead of using the
   manual defaults.

### 2. Pre-train the model

You can pre-train the model using the `MEICAR_pretrain` command. To use this, let us assume you have a new
directory to store the pretrained model artifacts called `$PRETRAINED_MODEL_DIR`. Then, you can run:

```bash
MEICAR_pretrain datamodule.config.tensorized_cohort_dir="$FINAL_DATA_DIR" \
    output_dir="$PRETRAINED_MODEL_DIR" \
    datamodule.batch_size=32
```

to train the model for 10 epochs.

This uses a [Hydra](https://hydra.cc/) configuration system, with the root config located in the
[`_pretrain.yaml`](src/MEDS_EIC_AR/configs/_pretrain.yaml) file. You can override any of the nested
configuration parameters (as shown above via `datamodule.config.tensorized_cohort_dir` on the command line,
though you will more likely materialize an experimental configuration file to disk in yaml form and overwrite
the config path and name directly in the normal hydra manner.

> [!WARNING]
> Tests here only validate that the model runs without errors and (in demo mode) runs without producing nans
> or invalid values. It has not yet been assessed to ensure it runs to convergence, etc.

### 3. Zero-shot Inference

Zero-shot inference consists of two steps:

1. Given a task cohort and a pre-trained model, for each sample in the task cohort, generate future
    trajectories from those inputs forward with the pre-trained model and save them to disk in a pseudo-MEDS
    format.
2. Resolve these generated trajectories into concrete, probabilistic predictions for the task cohort.

#### 3.1 Generate Trajectories for a task spec.

You can directly generate trajectories using the `MEICAR_generate_trajectories` command. This requires a few
more configuration parameters than the pre-training step, so let's go through those:

1. You need to specify the task labels directory in the `datamodule.config.task_labels_dir` parameter.
2. You need to specify the model initialization directory in the `model_initialization_dir` parameter. This
    is the output directory of the pre-train step.
3. You need to specify how you want to trade-off between allowed input context size and the maximum possible
    generated trajectory length. The former allows you to use more of the patient's record, but the latter
    controls how far into the future you can predict. This can be configured with one of three parameters in
    the `seq_lens` part of the config. If you set:
    - `seq_lens.generation_context_size`, that will be the maximum length of the input context, and the
        remaining length of the pretrained model's maximum sequence length will be used for generation.
    - `seq_lens.max_generated_trajectory_len`, that will be the maximum length of the generated trajectory,
        and the remaining length of the pretrained model's maximum sequence length will be used for the
        input.
    - `seq_lens.frac_seq_len_as_context`, that will be the fraction of the pretrained model's maximum
        sequence length that will be used for the input context, and the remaining length will be used for
        generation. This is set by default to 0.25, which means that 25% of the maximum sequence length will
        be used for the input context, and 75% will be used for generation. If you wish to use another mode
        on the command line, be sure to set this to `null` to disable it.
4. Lastly, you need to specify how many trajectories per task sample you wish to generate, and for which
    splits you wish to generate samples. You can do this via the `inference.generate_for_splits` and
    `inference.N_trajectories_per_task_sample` parameters. The former is a list of splits to generate and the
    latter is the number of trajectories to generate per task sample. The default is to generate 20
    trajectories for each task sample in the tuning and held out splits.

After these are set, you can run the following command to generate trajectories for a task cohort:

```bash
MEICAR_generate_trajectories \
    output_dir="$GENERATED_TRAJECTORIES_DIR" \
    model_initialization_dir="$PRETRAINED_MODEL_DIR" \
    datamodule.config.tensorized_cohort_dir="$FINAL_DATA_DIR" \
    datamodule.config.task_labels_dir="$TASK_ROOT_DIR/$TASK_NAME" \
    datamodule.batch_size=32
```

This will generate trajectories for the task cohort and save them in the format:
`$GENERATED_TRAJECTORIES_DIR/$SPLIT/$SAMPLE.parquet`.

See the documentation for [`format_trajectories`](src/MEDS_EIC_AR/generation/format_trajectories.py) for more
details on the format of the generated trajectories.

> [!WARNING]
> The tests here only validate that this runs without errors and produces trajectory files that are valid,
> non-identical across different samples, and containing the right subjects. It has not yet been assessed to
> ensure full correctness.

#### 3.2 Resolve Trajectories into Predictions.

Not yet implemented.

## Documentation

### Configuration and Controlling Model Structure

This model is configured via Hydra and PyTorch lightning. The configuration structure of this repository is as
follows:

```python
>>> print_directory("./src/MEDS_EIC_AR/configs", config=PrintConfig(file_extension=".yaml"))
├── _demo_generate_trajectories.yaml
├── _demo_pretrain.yaml
├── _generate_trajectories.yaml
├── _pretrain.yaml
├── datamodule
│   ├── default.yaml
│   ├── generate_trajectories.yaml
│   └── pretrain.yaml
├── inference
│   ├── default.yaml
│   └── demo.yaml
├── lightning_module
│   ├── LR_scheduler
│   │   ├── cosine_annealing_warm_restarts.yaml
│   │   ├── get_cosine_schedule_with_warmup.yaml
│   │   ├── one_cycle_LR.yaml
│   │   └── reduce_LR_on_plateau.yaml
│   ├── default.yaml
│   ├── demo.yaml
│   ├── large.yaml
│   ├── medium.yaml
│   ├── metrics
│   │   └── default.yaml
│   ├── micro.yaml
│   ├── model
│   │   ├── default.yaml
│   │   ├── demo.yaml
│   │   ├── large.yaml
│   │   ├── medium.yaml
│   │   ├── micro.yaml
│   │   └── small.yaml
│   ├── optimizer
│   │   ├── adam.yaml
│   │   └── adamw.yaml
│   └── small.yaml
└── trainer
    ├── callbacks
    │   ├── default.yaml
    │   ├── early_stopping.yaml
    │   ├── learning_rate_monitor.yaml
    │   └── model_checkpoint.yaml
    ├── default.yaml
    ├── demo.yaml
    └── logger
        ├── csv.yaml
        ├── mlflow.yaml
        └── wandb.yaml

```

## Output Files

The output files of the pre-training step are stored in the directory specified by the `output_dir` parameter
and take the following structure:

```python
>>> print_directory(pretrained_model)
├── .logs
│   ├── .hydra
│   │   ├── config.yaml
│   │   ├── hydra.yaml
│   │   └── overrides.yaml
│   └── __main__.log
├── best_model.ckpt
├── checkpoints
│   ├── epoch=0-step=1.ckpt
│   ├── epoch=0-step=2.ckpt
│   ├── epoch=1-step=3.ckpt
│   ├── epoch=1-step=4.ckpt
│   └── last.ckpt
├── config.yaml
├── loggers
│   └── csv
│       └── version_0
│           ├── hparams.yaml
│           └── metrics.csv
└── resolved_config.yaml

```
