src/MEDS_EIC_AR/preprocessing/README.md, before:

# "Everything-is-code" Pre-processing

> [!WARNING]
> I suspect this is not actually working yet. Tests currently just ensure it does not crash; not that the
> entire output of the pipeline looks as expected.

## Usage

You have three directories:

1. `$RAW_MEDS_DIR` -- The raw MEDS data directory that you want to pre-process.
2. `$INTERMEDIATE_DIR` -- An intermediate directory where the partially processed data will be stored prior
    to tokenization and tensorization.
3. `$OUTPUT_DIR` -- The final output directory where the tokenized and tensorized data will be stored. This
    directory is suitable for use in loading the data with `meds-torch-data`.

Run:

```bash
MEICAR_process_data input_dir="$RAW_MEDS_DIR" intermediate_dir="$INTERMEDIATE_DIR" output_dir="$OUTPUT_DIR"
```

You can also run this in demo mode, which lowers the filtering thresholds significantly so the script does not
filter out all data:

```bash
MEICAR_process_data ... do_demo=True
```

You can exert more fine-grained control on the filtering with the following environment variables:

1. `MIN_SUBJECTS_PER_CODE`: How many subjects must a given code be observed within to be included in the
    final vocabulary? Note that this excludes some sentinel codes which are always retained.
2. `MIN_EVENTS_PER_SUBJECT`: How many events must a subject have to be included in the final dataset?

## Differences from the MEDS-Torch version

1. In comparison to the MEDS-Torch
    [config](https://github.com/Oufattole/meds-torch/blob/d1650ea6152301a9b9bdbd32756337214e5f310f/ZERO_SHOT_TUTORIAL/configs/eic_config.yaml),
    this version removes the "reorder measurements" pre-processing step and the additional code filtering
    that is specific to MIMIC.
2. The
    [`custom_time_token.py`](https://github.com/Oufattole/meds-torch/blob/d1650ea6152301a9b9bdbd32756337214e5f310f/src/meds_torch/utils/custom_time_token.py)
    script has been renamed to
    [`add_time_interval_tokens.py`](src/MEDS_EIC_AR/stages/add_time_interval_tokens.py) and exported as a
    [script](pyproject.toml) in this package.
3. The `custom_filter_measurements` script is replaced with the generic filter measurements augmented with
    the match and revise syntax.
4. The
    [`quantile_binning.py`](https://github.com/Oufattole/meds-torch/blob/d1650ea6152301a9b9bdbd32756337214e5f310f/src/meds_torch/utils/quantile_binning.py)
    script has been copied to
    [`quantile_binning.py`](src/MEDS_EIC_AR/stages/quantile_binning.py) and exported as a
    [script](pyproject.toml) in this package.
5. The list of included stages has been revised to include only the ones that are uniquely relevant to this
    model. Data tokenization and tensorization stages have been outsourced to
    [meds-torch-data](https://meds-torch-data.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

Commit message:

Remove unused drop_numeric stage and update tests

src/MEDS_EIC_AR/preprocessing/README.md, after:

# "Everything-is-code" Pre-processing

> [!WARNING]
> I suspect this is not actually working yet. Tests currently just ensure it does not crash; not that the
> entire output of the pipeline looks as expected.

## Usage

You have three directories:

1. `$RAW_MEDS_DIR` -- The raw MEDS data directory that you want to pre-process.
2. `$INTERMEDIATE_DIR` -- An intermediate directory where the partially processed data will be stored prior
    to tokenization and tensorization.
3. `$OUTPUT_DIR` -- The final output directory where the tokenized and tensorized data will be stored. This
    directory is suitable for use in loading the data with `meds-torch-data`.

Run:

```bash
MEICAR_process_data input_dir="$RAW_MEDS_DIR" intermediate_dir="$INTERMEDIATE_DIR" output_dir="$OUTPUT_DIR"
```

You can also run this in demo mode, which lowers the filtering thresholds significantly so the script does not
filter out all data:

```bash
MEICAR_process_data ... do_demo=True
```

You can exert more fine-grained control on the filtering with the following environment variables:

1. `MIN_SUBJECTS_PER_CODE`: How many subjects must a given code be observed within to be included in the
    final vocabulary? Note that this excludes some sentinel codes which are always retained.
2. `MIN_EVENTS_PER_SUBJECT`: How many events must a subject have to be included in the final dataset?
3. `N_VALUE_QUANTILES`: If set, overrides the default evenly spaced quantile thresholds used when
    computing numeric value bins. This should be an integer and will result in `n` quantiles evenly spaced
    between 0 and 1.
4. `NUMERIC_QUANTILES`: Explicit list of quantiles to compute for numeric values. This should be a valid
    Python list (e.g. `[0.25, 0.5, 0.75]`). Takes precedence over `N_VALUE_QUANTILES`.
5. `NUMERIC_QUANTILES_FP`: Path to a YAML/JSON file containing custom bin definitions. When set, the
    quantile fitting stage is skipped and these bins are applied directly.
6. `INCLUDE_NUMERIC_VALUES`: If set to `0`, numeric values are removed entirely after preprocessing.
7. `USE_DATA_DRIVEN_TEMPORAL_BINS`: If set to `1`, the default manual time
   interval bins are ignored and quantiles are learned from the data instead.

## Differences from the MEDS-Torch version

1. In comparison to the MEDS-Torch
    [config](https://github.com/Oufattole/meds-torch/blob/d1650ea6152301a9b9bdbd32756337214e5f310f/ZERO_SHOT_TUTORIAL/configs/eic_config.yaml),
    this version removes the "reorder measurements" pre-processing step and the additional code filtering
    that is specific to MIMIC.
2. The
    [`custom_time_token.py`](https://github.com/Oufattole/meds-torch/blob/d1650ea6152301a9b9bdbd32756337214e5f310f/src/meds_torch/utils/custom_time_token.py)
    script has been renamed to
    [`add_time_interval_tokens.py`](src/MEDS_EIC_AR/stages/add_time_interval_tokens.py) and exported as a
    [script](pyproject.toml) in this package.
3. The `custom_filter_measurements` script is replaced with the generic filter measurements augmented with
    the match and revise syntax.
4. The
    [`quantile_binning.py`](https://github.com/Oufattole/meds-torch/blob/d1650ea6152301a9b9bdbd32756337214e5f310f/src/meds_torch/utils/quantile_binning.py)
    script has been copied to
    [`quantile_binning.py`](src/MEDS_EIC_AR/stages/quantile_binning.py) and exported as a
    [script](pyproject.toml) in this package.
5. The list of included stages has been revised to include only the ones that are uniquely relevant to this
    model. Data tokenization and tensorization stages have been outsourced to
    [meds-torch-data](https://meds-torch-data.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
